---
layout: post
section-type: post
title: An internship
category: Career
tags: [ 'internships' ]
---
<p align="left">This is my fist blog and what better subject to write on at this time of the year. Being a science major this is the time when I'm looking for internships. Having done 4 of them, I thought it might be a good idea to share my experiences. Please note that if you're looking for an answer to the question: 'What should I do?', you're at the wrong place, however, it might be helpful to read it as a story.</p>

<p align="left">This is the first thing which one has to make his or her mind about. NOT TO ASK ANYONE WHAT TO DO. It may sound a bit weird in the beginning but I believe that internships should be about what you want to do, what you want to explore, where you want to go. It should be about YOU. One of my college professors, <a href="http://www.niser.ac.in/~bedanga/" target="blank">Prof. Bedangadas Mohanty</a> once gave us, what I believe, is some very good advice about how to seek an internship. According to him you can do one or more of the following four things:
<ul>
  <li> Do something related to the course work of the next semester. </li>
  <li> Talk to your teachers and ask them what to do. </li>
  <li> Speak to your seniors and try to learn from their experience. </li>
  <li> Look on the internet, find out about the work of different people and then decide what you want to do. </li>
</ul>
</p>

<p align="left">Well as I've mentioned I'm not in complete agreement of the second point but I believe that the rest is absolutely sound advice. In this blog I want to focus particularly on the last point. The internet is a resource available at our disposal all the time. If used wisely it can help you find your desired internship with a lot of ease. What happens many a times to people is that they get lost on the web and end up giving upon the idea. This has happened to me as well. Based on my agreeably finite experience, I think what I'm going to tell you might help you deal with this problem.</p>

<p align="left">There are broadly two ways in which you can secure an internship. The first method is that you can apply via various programs such as the <a href="http://iusstf.org/story/53-74-For-Indian-Students.html" target="blank">S.N. Bose Scholars Program</a>, <a href = "https://www.mitacs.ca/en/programs/globalink/globalink-research-internship" target="blank">Mitacs</a>, the <a href = "http://www.hri.res.in/academics/physics/phy-vsp/" target="blank">Visiting Students program</a> at HRI Allahbad, <a href="http://www.imsc.res.in/visiting_summer_student_programme" target="blank">Physics Summer Research Programme</a> conducted by IMSc Chennai etc. Please note that these are only a few programs that I've mentioned. There are many other programs and the detailed information about these programs can be found out on their respective websites.</p>

<p align="left">The second method which I believe is the more effective yet very difficult one is to write emails to professors asking them if they have any open positions and wish to take up any interns. Many professors even mention it on their webpages. I consider this a better method because the chances of being selected in a program specially for people like me (those who don't have a stellar high GPA) are slim to virtually non-existent. However writing emails is much tricker because that is the one shot you get. If the professor doesn't find your email appealing, he or she wouldn't bother looking a second time because time isn't a luxury that they have. It's necessary to realize that they have classes to take, their own research to handle and many other official, un-official tasks to take care of. In spite of their busy schedule almost all of them do take out time to at least skim through their mail. Let us not get into that and focus on how to make sure that you maximize your chances of finding an opportunity.</p>

<p align="left"> The first task is to know what you want to do. The crudest bifurcation specifically in Physics would be to chose between the three -  computational physics, experimental physics and theoretical physics. It is even better if you could decide which field you want to work in. Let us say that one wants to do a computational project/internship specifically in nonlinear physics.</p>

<p align="left">The next step is to look for a professor which is the toughest part. If you don't know anyone in the field don't be disappointed. Through some common sense you can figure this out. First know what not to do. Looking for random google results, say, people in nonlinear physics would give you people like Prof. Strogatz and other pioneers in the field. It leads you no where. It also not possible to go through each and every professor's profile on every university's webpage because not many universities maintain their website properly. To solve this problem I've come up with a strategy which has helped me a lot. Find out the latest conference in the field and look at the list of speakers giving a talk there. This is helpful because people usually present their current work at the conferences. This is a two way advantage you get to know who are the people who are 'active' in the field and what they are currently working on. Also, the talks in a conference are sorted on the website as per various details: the discipline, topic of the talk and abstract which can help you even further.</p>

<p align="left">Once you select one professor based on the such searches, the tough part is over but you are only about quarter of the way through. What you should do next is go to google scholar or arxiv or the professor's homepage and look up their publications. Try to read the topic, if you find the title interesting go through the abstract, if you are interested in the abstract put the efforts of reading the paper. You don't have to understand the entire paper. It's almost impossible in the beginning. But if you spend enough time on it (it can take from a day to a week to even understand a tiny bit of it), you'll get the hang of some of it. This sounds very tedious and trust me it is a lot tougher than it sounds. But think about this, you're getting exposed to one of the most recent works in the field, which broadens your horizons. In addition, you get to know about scientific writing. It will help you write better reports, articles, papers.</p>

<p align="left">Once you think that you have understood something from the paper, try pondering upon it a bit. Put efforts to connect it to your past knowledge, the courses you have done, the articles you have read in the past. It's worthwhile to try and come up with what could be extensions of the current work. If you do this, you will have something to write in the email.</p>

<p align="left">The final part is writing the email. We as students often mess this up due to our naivety. Writing generic emails such as, "Dear Sir/Ma'am I am a student at XYZ and want to do a project under your supervision." will usually not get you anywhere. It's a better idea to address them as Prof./Dr. SURNAME. It shows that you have bothered to do some homework. Introduce yourself. Tell them why you want to work with them, quoting which work of theirs you liked might help you here. If you have read the article as advised in the previous paragraph you'll have something to write about. Propose what you wish to do for the internship. As a student, the ideas we give are usually very vague and might not be even feasible, but it reflects are efforts and this is what most supervisors are looking for someone who is willing to put in efforts (I'm not trying to flatter anyone nor am I trying to sound superior in any respect, I'm just quoting what I've often heard from my professors). </p>

<p align="left">Now that you have a certain structure in your email, you may want to proofread it, attach a CV and then send it. It might be helpful to request someone for a letter of recommendation in case it is required. It is a very demanding process. Going this way it may take upto a week or two writing a single email, you might be rejected or may not even get a reply even after that but I can testify that it is worth it.</p>

<p align="left">I've secured all my internships by writing emails. I've also been rejected a lot. It's disappointing many a times. But one should look at the silver lining. I now know how to write my own CV, what is relevant what is not. I've read many papers and at least have some idea of what they were about, this will be useful some day or the other. And if one is selected through this method, you know what you are up to. You can prepare in advance before going for the internship, it will be challenging anyway but you'll be up to it because you chose to do it.</p>

<p align="left">My friends and juniors often tell me how they aren't getting any replies and it is very frustrating, I completely understand but you should look at the odds. From the data which I have, the chances of getting an offer via this method are a little shy of 10%, but to motivate you, I'll remind you of something. The odds of you being in the college you currently are in were lesser than 0.5%. So putting in honest efforts without being disappointed in the only key here.</p>

<p align="left">Please note that whatever I've written is my personal opinion. You may not agree with it at all and may know a better method as well. But this is something which I've deduced on my own and has helped me a lot. That being said, please feel free to comment on the blog or send me an email if you have any other queries. I'll constantly update this blog if something else comes up in my mind.</p>
